Series
2912 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016Urban design, transport, and health 1
City planning and population health: a global challenge
Billie Giles-Corti, Anne Vernez-Moudon, Rodrigo Reis, Gavin Turrell, Andrew L Dannenberg, Hannah Badland, Sarah Foster, Melanie  Lowe, 
James F Sallis, Mark Stevenson, Neville Owen
Signiﬁ  cant global health challenges are being confronted in the 21st century, prompting calls to rethink approaches 
to disease prevention. A key part of the solution is city planning that reduces non-communicable diseases and road 
trauma while also managing rapid urbanisation. This Series of papers considers the health impacts of city planning through transport mode choices. In this, the ﬁ  rst paper, we identify eight integrated regional and local interventions 
that, when combined, encourage walking, cycling, and public transport use, while reducing private motor vehicle use. These interventions are destination accessibility, equitable distribution of employment across cities, managing demand by reducing the availability and increasing the cost of parking, designing pedestrian-friendly and cycling-friendly movement networks, achieving optimum levels of residential density, reducing distance to public transport, and enhancing the desirability of active travel modes (eg, creating safe attractive neighbourhoods and safe, aﬀ  ordable, 
and convenient public transport). Together, these interventions will create healthier and more sustainable compact cities that reduce the environmental, social, and behavioural risk factors that aﬀ  ect lifestyle choices, levels of traﬃ   c, 
environmental pollution, noise, and crime. The health sector, including health ministers, must lead in advocating for integrated multisector city planning that prioritises health, sustainability, and liveability outcomes, particularly in rapidly changing low-income and middle-income countries. We recommend establishing a set of indicators to benchmark and monitor progress towards achievement of more compact cities that promote health and reduce health inequities.
Introduction
Signiﬁ  cant global health challenges are being confronted 
in the 21st century, including increases in unhealthy diets, physical inactivity, non-communicable diseases (NCDs), injuries from road trauma, and obesity, combined with population growth, rapid urbanisation, and climate change, prompting repeated calls to rethink approaches to prevention.
1–5 Decisions about housing, 
food, water, energy, transport, social services, and health care6 will profoundly aﬀ  ect the health, wellbeing, and 
safety of growing and ageing urban populations.4,6,7 With 
the world’s population estimated to reach 10 billion people by 2050, and 75% of this population living in cities,
5 city planning is now recognised as part of a 
comprehensive solution to tackling adverse health outcomes.
5
Associations between city planning and health are not 
new. In the 19th century, planning curbed infectious disease outbreaks in industrialising cities through improvements in sanitation and housing and separation of residential areas from industrial pollution.
8,9 In the 
21st century, well planned cities have the potential to reduce NCDs and road trauma and to promote health and wellbeing more broadly. This could be achieved by reducing automobile dependency, traﬃ   c exposure, 
pollution, noise, and urban heat-island eﬀ  ects, while 
enhancing mental health, contributing to climate change mitigation, and promoting walking and cycling in ways that are safe, comfortable, and desirable.
Leading global agencies recognise that city planning 
and management decisions aﬀ  ect the liveability of cities
6 
and, ultimately, the health and wellbeing of residents. WHO recommends “placing health and health equity at the heart of [city] governance and planning”,
10 
highlighting the need for integrated urban planning, transport, and housing policy. This mirrors the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s call for leadership from “transport, land 
use and health ministers” to create the “legal, administrative and technical frameworks” that promote walking.
11 Similarly, the UN has endorsed integrated Lancet 2016; 388: 2912–24
Published Online
September 23, 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)30066-6
This is the first in a Series
 of 
three papers about urban design, 
transport, and health
University of 
Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia  
(Prof B Giles-Corti PhD, 
H Badland PhD, M Lowe PhD, 
Prof M Stevenson PhD) ; 
University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA 
(Prof A Vernez-Moudon Dr ès Sc, 
Prof A L Dannenberg MD); 
Pontifical Catholic University 
of Parana, Parana, Brazil 
(Prof R Reis PhD); Washington 
University at St Louis, St Louis, 
MO, USA (Prof R S Reis); Federal 
University of Parana, Curitiba, 
Brazil (Prof R S Reis); Australian 
Catholic University, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia 
(Prof G Turrell PhD); Queensland 
University of Technology, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia 
(Prof G Turrell); University of 
Western Australia, Perth, WA, 
Australia (S Foster PhD); 
University of California, 
San Diego, CA, USA 
(Prof J F Sallis PhD); Baker IDI 
Heart and Diabetes Institute, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
(Prof N Owen PhD); and 
Swinburne University of 
Technology Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia (Prof N Owen)
Correspondence to:
Prof Billie Giles-Corti, 
University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
b.giles-corti@unimelb.edu.auKey messages
• Signiﬁ  cant global health challenges are being confronted 
in the 21st century
, and well planned cities that encourage 
walking, cycling, and public transport use have an 
important role to play in addressing these challenges
• Urban and transport planning and design can directly and 
indirectly aﬀ  ect non-communicable diseases, traﬃ   c injuries, 
and other adverse health and environmental outcomes 
• Local and regional interventions can aﬀ  ect urban and 
transport planning and design, and these inﬂ  uence 
environmental, social, and behavioural risk exposures 
• Integration of well implemented urban systems policies 
are needed to achieve healthy liveable cities
• Transport, planning and health ministers must develop 
appropriate legal, administrative, and technical frameworks contextualised to local conditions, to deliver compact pedestrian and cycling friendly cities that reduce private motor vehicle dependency
• City planning indicators are required to monitor progress 
within and between citiesSeries
www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016 2913agendas to combat NCDs.12 The UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals include promoting healthy lives and 
wellbeing by making cities inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable.
13 However, changing the way cities are 
planned, built, and managed will require bipartisan political leadership and community engagement.
In a rapidly urbanising world, understanding how 
urban and transport planning and design decisions aﬀ ect health is important. City planners have 
traditionally focused on the physical, social, economic, and environmental aspects of where people live.
14 
However, rapid changes in motorised transport have increased the geographical size of urban areas. Combined with unprecedented urban population growth, this change has put transport mobility at the forefront of city planning. Early in the 20th century, engineers began addressing traﬃ   c congestion and road trauma in European and North American cities. Transport engineering soon emerged as a new ﬁ  eld, 
gaining political and economic inﬂ  uence with the construction of national motorway networks after World War 2. Transport planning followed as an engineering subﬁ  eld.
15 City planning and transport 
planning are now typically run at all levels of government, but in separate agencies. Both are closely linked to political systems because they oversee major capital-intensive operations.
16 However, these 
disciplines currently operate in separate academic settings with their research underpinned by diﬀ  erent 
theoretical approaches.
17
This Lancet Series focuses on the health impacts of city 
planning through transport mode choices. Drawing on evidence from multiple disciplines and using critical and systematic reviews where available, in this, the ﬁ  rst 
paper we review the published work and propose pathways through which urban and transport planning and urban design (together referred to as city planning) directly and indirectly aﬀ  ect NCDs, traﬃ   c injuries, and 
other adverse health outcomes. We also identify eight urban and transport planning and design interventions and consider their inﬂ  uence on eight environmental, 
social, and behavioural health risk exposures. The second paper in this Series
18 models some of the 
pathways through which city planning aﬀ  ects health. 
The third paper19 focuses on research translation by 
considering how science can be, and is already being, used to guide city planning policy and practice that create compact cities that promote health.
Urban planning and transport interventions
Eight interventions to promote health
Urban planning and transport planning academics have long sought to understand ways to reduce motor vehicle kilometres travelled and encourage use of public transport and active transport modes such as walking and cycling.
20 These academics have identiﬁ  ed 
six key built-form characteristics and related policies that are referred to as the 6Ds.20 Building on this work, 
we identify eight integrated interventions that are needed to create cities that promote health (table 1). We also diﬀ  erentiate between urban and transport planning and design policies that determine regional and local outcomes.
At the regional level, urban and transport planning 
inﬂ uences the availability and accessibility of employment 
and key destinations required for daily living (eg, food outlets, educational facilities, and health and community services), particularly by public transport. Urban and transport planning also manages demand for driving (eg, the ease and cost of driving and car parking) relative to active modes of transport. Local urban design and transport policies inﬂ  uence local neighbourhoods’ 
structure, look, feel, and convenience (eg, street network design, availability of walking and cycling infrastructure, residential densities, the diversity and mix of land-use, and housing types); the desirability of neighbourhoods (eg, levels of crime and traﬃ   c safety); and public transport 
(eg, convenience, aﬀ  ordability, service frequency, safety, 
and comfort). Achievement of more compact sustainable cities that promote health requires integrated regional and local planning and design.
Pathways to better health through urban planning 
and design
The ﬁ  gure shows potential pathways through which city 
planning decisions inﬂ  uence the health and wellbeing of residents. Moving from left to right, the ﬁ  gure shows how eight urban system policies work together to create urban and transport planning and design interventions that directly and indirectly aﬀ  ect health by inﬂ  uencing daily 
living options and transport mode choices and demand. In turn, these interventions determine eight risk exposures related to NCDs, road trauma, and other adverse health outcomes. Next, these risk exposures determine intermediary outcomes (eg, greenhouse gas emissions and chronic disease risk factors) as well as traﬃ   c injury 
and disease outcomes, which ultimately determine quality of life and health, social, and environmental equity.
Urban environments and health inequities
According to WHO and UN Habitat’s report Hidden Cities, 
all urban environments have the ability to produce health inequities that are “systematic, socially produced (and therefore modiﬁ  able), and unfair”.
21 The nature and 
extent of these health inequities vary within and between countries, partly as a result of diﬀ  ering progress in nutritional, demographic, and epidemiological transitions. The socioeconomically disadvantaged have the highest rates of mortality and morbidity for most major causes of death, including infectious diseases, NCDs, and traﬃ   c injuries.
10 Independent of individual 
socioeconomic position (compositional factors),22 
characteristics of the places in which people live (contextual factors) aﬀ  ect health inequities (ﬁ  gure).
23,24Series
2914 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016Risk exposures inﬂ  uenced by city planning
Traﬃ   c exposure
Here we consider evidence for eight environmental, 
social, and behavioural risk exposures related to urban and transport planning and design decisions (ﬁ  gure), 
which in turn aﬀ  ect NCDs, injuries, and other adverse health outcomes. 
Private motor vehicle sales are often used as an indicator 
of economic growth, development, and modernisation. However, a higher reliance on private motor vehicles increases traﬃ   c volumes and road trauma,
25,26 resulting in 
injury and early death.27 Road traﬃ   c injuries are the 
eighth leading cause of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) worldwide, and, in some LMICs, road traﬃ   c 
injuries are the second leading cause of DALYs, with young people bearing the greatest burden.
28 Between 1990 
and 2010, overall global DALYs due to pedestrian injuries increased by more than those for other transport injuries.
7 
Indeed, deaths from road transport injuries exceed those from HIV /AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria.
29 By 2030, 
road traﬃ   c injury-related DALYs are estimated to be more 
than ten-times those of tuberculosis and malaria combined and twice those of HIV /AIDS.
30
Urban and transport planning and design decisions 
directly aﬀ  ect the need for private motor vehicles by determining the location of housing in relation to employment, education, and the services required for daily living. These decisions aﬀ  ect travel distances and, 
in the absence of convenient transport options, traﬃ   c 
volumes, both of which are related to road trauma.
31 
Although the risk of collision increases with higher vehicular traﬃ   c volume and increased population density,
32 once a critical mass of walking or cycling is 
achieved, the collision rate falls, although the overall number of injuries and deaths might still rise.
33
In high-income and middle-income countries, eﬀ  orts 
to improve traﬃ   c safety have focused mainly on safe road design for private vehicles, vehicle crashworthiness, and modifying driver behaviour (eg, driving at slower speeds and not driving while impaired).
34 Land-use and transport 
planning that reduces automobile dependence and decreases vehicle kilometres travelled can also reduce the risk of road trauma.
35,36
The health burden of motor vehicle-related injuries 
continues to disproportionately aﬀ  ect active transport 
users (as discussed in this Series18) and those without 
access to a vehicle, including poor, young, and older people.
37,38 Concerns about traﬃ   c and road safety are a 
major deterrent to parents permitting children to use active travel modes.
39 In high-income countries, such as 
the USA and Australia, many city streets have become child-free zones,
39 with rapid declines in the number of 
children using active transport modes to travel to and from school and around their neighbourhoods.
40,41
In several countries (eg, Germany, France, The 
Netherlands, and Sweden), injury and fatality rates for active transport users have been reduced by more than 70% (from 1975 to 2001).
42,43 These countries have 
implemented new laws of strict liability, where vulnerable road users (not drivers) are assumed to be innocent. These countries have also lowered speed limits in towns and cities to 30 km/h; introduced high-quality transport systems; introduced demand management strategies, including reduced car parking; devised protective road Urban and transport planning and design features Examples
Regional planning
Destination accessibility Regional employment, facilities, and services conveniently accessible by public 
transport; destinations for daily living available locallyJobs, facilities, and services within 30 min travel from home by public 
transport; daily living destinations within walking distance
Distribution of employment An appropriate mix of employment available across a region A job–housing balance from 0·8 to 1·2
Demand management Parking supply and pricing policies increase the attractiveness of using 
alternative travel modes to drivingBuilding codes and other government policies that minimise car parking
Local urban design
Design Urban design creates walkable catchments around activity centres and 
incorporates accessible public open space; street networks minimise distances between homes and daily living destinations, reduce traﬃ   c exposure, and create safe pedestrian, cycling, and public transport networks; lot* layouts designed to increase residential densities and promote natural surveillanceHigh street connectivity including ped-sheds ≥0·6 within 0·8–1·2 km (ie, 1–15 min walk) of activity centres, transport hubs, and schools; separated pedestrian and cycle paths; local public open space provided; housing overlooks streets and public open spaces
Density Residential densities suﬃ   cient to support the viability of local business and 
high-frequency public transport servicesMultiunit housing built around activity centres with shops, services, and transport hubs
Distance to public transport High-frequency public transport located within short walking distances from 
homesBus stops accessible ≤400 m; rail stops accessible ≤800 m from homes
Diversity Residential areas built with diﬀ  erent types of housing mixed with commercial, 
public, and recreational opportunitiesDiﬀ  erent types of housing available near, around, and on top of shops and services required for daily living
Desirability Neighbourhoods designed to be safe, attractive, and accessible; public transport that is convenient, aﬀ  ordable, frequent, safe, and comfortableCrime prevention design principles incorporated into residential and commercial developments; urban greening strategies implemented; traﬃ   c minimised, 
calmed, and separated from pedestrians and cyclists, particularly near schools
*Also known as plots in some countries, including those in the UK.
Table 1: Urban and transport planning and design interventions and features required to create compact cities that enhance health and wellbeing Series
www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016 2915designs that reduce conﬂ  icts between pedestrians, 
cyclists, and drivers; and improved traﬃ   c signals.44,45 
These practices could be trialled elsewhere to reduce the global burden of road injury while also increasing the demand for active travel and reducing NCD risks.
Air pollution
Several meta-analyses and reviews show a relationship between air pollution exposure and health impacts, including the incidence and prevalence of childhood asthma and wheeze,
46 asthma exacerbation,47 impaired 
lung function,48 cardiovascular mortality and 
morbidity,48,49 all-cause mortality,47,48 hospital admis-
sions,48 and restricted physical activity.48 The global 
disease burden attributed to ambient particulate matter pollution from all sources remained stable between 1990 and 2010, at approximately 3% of DALYs.
50 
However, concerns are growing about urban air pollution in LMICs caused by increasing population concentrations, industrial pollution, burning of solid Transport
Social and
health services
Public open space
and recreationEducation
Land use and 
urban design
Housing
Public safetyEmployment
and economicdevelopmentDestination
accessibility
Distribution of
employment
Demand
management
Density
Distance to
transit
Diversity
DesirabilityDesignRegional planningPrivate motor
vehicle
Traﬃc incidents Road trauma
Greenhouse gas
and particulatematter emissions,climate change
Obesity and
overweight,cardiometabolicrisk factorsRespiratory
disease
Heat stress
Infectious
diseases
Mental illnessLiveability, health,
wellbeing, andquality of life;social, health, andenvironmentalequity andequality
Socioeconomic position and area level disadvantageMajor chronic
diseases:cardiovasculardisease, type 2diabetes, cancerPublic transport
Traﬃc
Noise
Social isolation
Personal safety
Physical inactivity
Prolonged sitting
Unhealthy dietAir pollutionCycling
Walking or cyclingTransport mode
outcomes
Attitudes and
preferences
Social and
cultural normsDemand
Local urban designTransport mode anddaily living outcomes
Risk exposuresIntermediaryoutcomesInjury and diseaseoutcomes
Mobility needs
Employment and
educationalaccess
Food and health
service accessDaily living outcomes
Age
GenderDemographicsSocial and
recreationalaccessUrban system
policiesUrban and transportplanning and designinterventions
Figure: Direct and indirect pathways through which urban and transport planning and design decisions inﬂ  uence health and wellbeingSeries
2916 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016fuels, and the unprecedented rise in motor vehicle 
ownership.51,52
Motor vehicle traﬃ   c exposure is a major source of air 
pollution in both high-income countries and LMICs. People living within 300 m of busy roads are exposed to higher levels of pollutants, including particulate matter, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide.
53 Cars are typically 
older in LMICs and generate higher emissions than cars in high-income countries.
54
The transport sector also indirectly aﬀ  ects health 
through climate change pathways by accounting for 25% of global carbon dioxide emissions; 75% of which arise from road transport.
55 Policies to create a multimodal 
transport road system that prioritises walking, cycling, and public transport use would substantially reduce urban air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions, producing a range of environmental and health beneﬁ  ts.
4,55
Physical activity outdoors, including walking and 
cycling, can increase exposure to air pollution.56 However, 
air pollution exposure is substantial  for car occupants 
and is higher for those in cars than for cyclists travelling through the same environment.
57,58 Other research 
suggests that the health beneﬁ  ts of cycling outweigh the risks from air pollution exposure.
59,60
City planning can assist by setting homes, schools, parks, 
and exercise facilities away from heavily traﬃ   cked roads 
and by separating cycle lanes from motor vehicle traﬃ   c.56 
To protect residents from increased air pollution exposure risk, greater consideration needs to be given to the design of higher density housing sited on heavily traﬃ   cked roads.
61
Noise
Chronic noise exposure has implications for physical and mental health through annoyance, sleep disturbance, and chronic stress pathways.
62 Road traﬃ   c noise is the 
most important source of ambient noise exposure 
worldwide.62–64 A recent meta-analysis concluded that 
traﬃ  c noise in Europe caused between 400 and 
1500 DALYs per million population.65
Road traﬃ   c noise exposure inﬂ  uences physical health 
outcomes such as cardiovascular disease and hypertension,
64,66-68 and airport noise is associated with 
reduced quality of life, impaired cognitive development in children,
66 and reduced psychological wellbeing.69 
However, most of the studies included in reviews have been cross-sectional.
The health impacts of noise exposure could be 
ameliorated by setting homes, schools and other services away from heavily traﬃ   cked routes; reducing and slowing road traﬃ   c; using noise abating road-surfacing materials; and designing housing to improve sound attenuation, including locating bedrooms and balconies away from noise sources.
61,64
Social isolation
Loneliness and social isolation are associated with worse mental health,
70 adverse health behaviours (eg, physical inactivity and smoking), and detrimental biological processes (eg, higher blood pressure and C-reactive protein, and poorer immune functioning) compared with regular social contact.
71 A 2015 meta-analysis 
concluded that the impact of social isolation on premature mortality was comparable to other established health risk factors (eg, obesity), highlighting its importance as a public health issue.
71
Evidence suggests that urban design and planning can 
encourage social interactions and cohesion,58 and have 
subsequent health beneﬁ  ts.70 The design of streets and 
public open spaces can encourage residents to stop, linger, and interact.
58 Accessible and diverse destinations 
and transport options increase walking trips, which in turn have been linked to unplanned social encounters and sense of community.
58 Neighbourhood destinations 
also provide settings for cultural and informal social activities that can enhance community connections and sense of belonging.
58 However, suﬃ   cient residential 
densities are required to create vibrant neighbours.61
As cities grow and densify, a challenge is to create 
urban environments with suﬃ   cient density and local amenities to promote walking and social interactions, while also protecting residents from the high activity levels created by dense neighbourhoods.
58 There is little 
understanding about the optimum density to promote social contact while mitigating other urban exposures, particularly in more vulnerable and low-income populations. These urban design attributes are insuﬃ   cient to reduce social isolation if the neighbourhood 
is regarded as undesirable (ie, it is unsafe or poorly maintained). Poor neighbourhood upkeep can signal a breakdown of social control and has been associated with increased crime and a fear of crime.
72
Safety from crime
Crime can aﬀ  ect NCDs because people might constrain 
their own, and their children’s, social and physical activities to avoid places or situations they perceive to be unsafe.
73,74 Although evidence is mixed, the associations of 
crime-related safety and physical inactivity with increased obesity levels are more consistent for groups who perceive themselves to be physically vulnerable to crime (eg, women and older adults) or who are economically vulnerable to crime (eg, low-income and minority populations).
73,75 Low-income groups are exposed to more 
neighbourhood crime and disorder; they are typically more fearful but often have no alternative to walking for transport,
73 which might partly explain mixed research 
ﬁ ndings.73 Crime and the fear of crime also have 
associations with mental health, but there is less clarity on the causal direction.
76
Shopping centres, transport nodes, and street 
connectivity result in more people walking and circulating locally, but have also been associated with opportunistic crime such as property crime (eg, burglaries, vandalism). Liquor stores and drinking Series
www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016 2917venues have been associated with higher levels of alcohol 
consumption and violent crime.77 Yet neighbourhoods 
with diverse and accessible destinations and transport options encourage locals to walk, which enhances natural surveillance, in turn, making people feel safer. Encouraging more so-called eyes on the street is central to an approach to crime prevention that incorporates urban design principles, aiming to reduce opportunities for criminal behaviours.
77 Although more eyes on the 
street are generally interpreted as a source of safety, any beneﬁ  t depends on whether these people are viewed as 
accepted users of the space.
78
Notably, the incidence of crime does not necessarily 
mean that people feel unsafe or fearful.76 The presence of 
physical disorder that typically clusters near non-residential land-use and vacant land has associations with heightened safety concerns.
72 These relationships 
can be exacerbated for low-income populations who often live in neighbourhoods with concentrated deprivation and have fewer ﬁ  nancial resources to buﬀ  er 
themselves from real (or perceived) threats to safety.
72 
Furthermore, low-income neighbourhoods can be marred by additional safety hazards (eg, unattended dogs and heavy and high-speed traﬃ   c).
75
Physical inactivity
Physical inactivity and unhealthy diets are the largest contributors to NCDs, and much of the evidence on city planning and health has focused on physical activity. In 2010, about 3·2 million deaths annually were attributed to being insuﬃ   ciently active, causing 69·3 million global DALYs.
79 Physical inactivity increases the risk of major 
NCDs, including coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, colon cancer, and breast cancer, as well as reducing life expectancy.
80 Land-use and transport planning decisions 
can inﬂ  uence the convenience, attractiveness, and safety of walking and cycling for transport, as well as the opportunities for, and desirability of, recreational physical activity.
Walking and cycling can serve both transportation and 
recreational purposes, and both modes can reduce private motor vehicle dependency. Walking and cycling often, but not always, need diﬀ  erent infrastructure. 
Walking is more common than cycling and typically needs less skill, equipment, and infrastructure. However, cycling allows longer distances to be travelled in less time, thereby reducing time spent commuting and increasing access to amenities. Cycling rates are much higher in European cities where cycling-friendly policies and infrastructure investments have been implemented compaired with North America and Australia.
44
Urban planning and design that creates neighbourhoods 
with connected street network patterns, combined with zoning to support mixed-use and higher-density development (ie, walkable neighbourhoods), promotes walking for transport.
20, 81–84 Creating cities that facilitate 
physical activity as part of daily utilitarian activities can promote health and prevent NCDs. By contrast, low-density urban fringe residential development with poor access to shops, services, and public transport fosters automobile dependence and reduces physical activity opportunities.
The evidence for recreational walking is less consistent. 
Neighbourhood desirability (eg, its aesthetics, levels of traﬃ  c, and real and perceived safety from crime and 
disorder) and access to public open space is inconsistently associated with recreational walking,
81,82,85 particularly in 
studies relying on perceptions rather than objective measures. One review reported that, although there was only moderate evidence that access to parks and aesthetics encouraged recreational walking, all studies that measured the quality of recreational destinations reported positive associations with recreational walking.
85 Indeed, access to high-quality green space has 
also been shown to enhance both physical and mental health.
86–90 As cities grow and become more compact, 
preserving and increasing high-quality public open space will become important as access to private yards and gardens declines.
61
Prolonged sitting
Sedentary behaviours—ie, too much sitting, as distinct from too little physical activity—have emerged as a new concern for chronic disease prevention
91,92 and are 
associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, some cancers, and all-cause mortality.
93,94 Urban-dwelling working adults can sit for 
10 h or more per day, which increases health risks, even among those who meet physical activity guidelines.
95,96 
Prolonged periods of sitting includes time spent in cars and can be associated with increased cardiovascular disease risk
97,98 and poorer mental health.99
In high-income countries, time in cars, television 
viewing, and other screen use account for up to 85% of adults’ non-occupational sitting time.
100 Worldwide, 
sedentary behaviours are rapidly rising as LMIC shift from agricultural to manufacturing and service economies with increased use of labour-saving devices and more motorised forms of transport.
101
Urban design and planning attributes (particularly for 
density, diversity of land-use, availability of multiple local destinations, and distance to transport and local amenities that provide a range of more active choices for daily living options), can help to reduce sitting time.
102, 103 
A recent review of 17 studies identiﬁ  ed 89 associations between environmental attributes and sedentary behaviours; the most consistent ﬁ  nding was that people living in large urban areas spend less time sedentary than do those living in smaller towns or cities.
104 Large 
urban areas of high-income countries often have more extensive public transport infrastructure, which allows more residents to spend less time sitting in private vehicles. Given the rapid changes being observed globally, research is needed in this emerging area.Series
2918 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016Unhealthy diets
Worldwide 2·6 million deaths a year are attributable to 
insuﬃ   cient fruit and vegetable intake,105 and an estimated 
2·1 billion people are overweight or obese.106 A growing 
evidence base has examined the relationship between food purchasing, diets, and urban food environment land-use characteristics: food availability (ie, food supply) and food accessibility (ie, food supply location and physical 
proximity).
107 The availability107 and variety108,109 of healthy 
food are consistently and positively associated with better diets, with supermarket density related to higher fruit and vegetable consumption.
108 Conversely, fast-food availability 
is positively associated with fast-food purchasing,109 fast-
food consumption,110 and obesity risk,111 and these are 
strongly associated with socioeconomic disadvantage.112
The evidence linking health and food accessibility (as 
measured by proximity) is less consistent, especially for fast-food access.
107 In urban settings, supermarket 
proximity has been associated with higher fruit and vegetable intake and reduced prevalence of obesity,
113 
even for people with no private motor vehicle access.108 
Conversely, living in areas with poor access to healthy and aﬀ  ordable food might require residents without accessible public or private transport to shop in smaller local stores with limited variety, poorer quality, and higher prices, thereby compromising food security and potentially widening inequities.
114,115
Preservation of local arable land is crucial for the long-
term food supply.116 To feed the world’s growing 
population will need up to 100% more food by 2050.117 
Consequently, land-use policies that protect and support agriculture in urban and peri-urban settings are essential to reduce inequities by facilitating access to local food.
116,117
Implications of urban planning and design 
initiatives in LMICs
Translation of evidence from high-income countries into 
appropriate policies for LMICs, where urban environments often diﬀ  er greatly, can be challenging. For example, in most middle-income countries, overall density patterns are considerably higher
118 and cities tend to be more 
compact and monocentric (with jobs, cultural opportunities, and activities located mainly in the city centre).
119 Urban residents in LMICs also depend heavily 
on informal and relatively inexpensive on-demand transport services (eg, private taxis, buses, cycles, motorcycles, and rickshaws).
 120,121 These informal services 
often contribute to congestion, air pollution, and reduced traﬃ  c and personal safety. Finally, compared with both 
high-income and middle-income countries, low-income countries tend to have lower degrees of urbanisation, fewer employment opportunities, and poorer availability and quality of public services (eg, public transportation).
122
Insuﬃ   cient separation of pedestrians and motorised 
transport, particularly in LMICs, reduces pedestrian safety and increases road trauma. Additionally, rapid urbanisation combined with a lack of adequate traﬃ   c regulation results in a large and growing burden of disease associated with road injuries, road deaths,
7 and 
high crime rates.123
Greater social inequities are also observed between and 
within all LMIC.124 These factors include inequities in 
access to the basic building blocks of health-promoting urban development (eg, sanitation, adequate housing)
125 
as well as higher order infrastructure and services that create health and wellbeing and make cities liveable (eg, access to public open spaces, education, and health services).
124 These urban challenges now feature in the 
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.13
While walking for commuting purposes is usually 
more prevalent among urban populations in LMICs,126 
access to health services, sanitation, clean water, and adequate housing is less common.
124,127 In many Asian 
and African countries, powered two-wheelers (motorbikes and scooters) are the preferred low-cost high-mobility vehicles for both commercial and personal purposes, contributing to high rates of road trauma.
29 
The popularity of electric bikes could help to reduce air pollution and ambient noise levels, thereby addressing some of the health impacts of motorised traﬃ   c in cities.
128 
However, if powered two-wheeler travel is substituted for walking, this will reduce physical activity, increase obesity,
129 and increase the already growing levels of road 
trauma. For example, in China, rapid increases in motorisation in the 1990s saw a doubling of obesity in men (but not women) whose households gained a motor vehicle.
129 Further, LMICs have seen substantial recent 
changes to their food supply chains, moving from subsistence farming to processed foods from supermarkets and convenience stores.
116 Hence, complex 
interactions are at play when planning cities to improve health in LMICs.
So far there is little evidence from LMICs
130,131 from 
which other cities and countries can learn. Over recent decades, several Latin American cities (eg, Curitiba, Brazil; Bogotá, Colombia; and Mexico City, Mexico) have implemented extensive bus rapid transit systems,
120 
which have overcome transport inequities and improved access to public services (eg, health care)
132 and 
employment opportunities, as well as increasing physical activity levels.
133,134 Additionally, aﬀ  ordable housing 
programmes have reduced the proportion of people living in slums and degraded areas,
135 and increased 
access to clean water, sanitation, and transport. In recent years, cycle-sharing programmes have been established in many Latin American cities.
120 From 1993 to 2007, 
China (the country with the largest number of cycles and cyclists) had a drastic decline in cycle ownership (from 197 cycles per 100 households to 133 cycles per 100 households).
136 However, since 2005, large-scale 
cycle-sharing programmes have been implemented in most of China’s major cities.
137
The potential for initiatives to increase inequities must 
also be considered. In Latin America, although small Series
www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016 2919increases in bicycle use have been observed, most bicycle-
share programmes are implemented in socioeconomically advantaged areas.
120 Similarly, in Hangzhou, China, 
members of bicycle-share programmes were found to have a higher rate of car ownership than non-members, probably because those who did not have a car used their own bicycles.
136 Additionally, many housing projects 
implemented in Latin America lack integrated planning, resulting in limited access to services.
120 Finally, the 
implementation of large-scale projects (eg, Olympics in Beijing and Rio de Janeiro) could improve outcomes in some areas (eg, access to public transport) but increase inequities (eg, displacement of low-income residents to outer suburbs with no public transport and amenities).
Hence, in LMICs, there is potential for health inequities 
to widen if insuﬃ   cient attention is paid to integrated land-use, transport, housing, and infrastructure legislation and planning. The poor resources and the rate of economic and societal change can make integrated planning in LMICs seem challenging. However, integrated planning could optimise the use of existing resources and help to avoid unintended consequences, particularly those of large-scale interventions, which should be well evaluated both before and after implementation.
Discussion
The escalating personal, social, and economic burden imposed by rapidly rising rates of NCDs and their risk factors,
12 together with the health and societal impacts of 
climate change,4 will produce immense human and 
environmental harm that threatens to undermine global social and economic development and security.
12 Between 
now and 2030, an estimated US$58 trillion is needed worldwide to upgrade, maintain, and develop urban infrastructure to meet growing demand and the challenges of the 21st century.
138
Designing pedestrian-friendly and cycling-friendly 
cities will help to reduce inequities and produce co-beneﬁ  ts across multiple sectors,
139,140 including health, 
traﬃ  c management, environment (mobility, air quality, 
energy, water, and climate change), and the economy.141 
Better planned and designed cities will help to build communities by decreasing commute and mandatory travel times away from one’s neighbourhood.
142
City planning is therefore an essential element of a 
multilevel, multisector response to face the major global health challenges of the 21st century. Appropriate legal, administrative, and technical urban planning and design frameworks are urgently needed to create more compact cities that facilitate active travel modes to promote health and lower greenhouse gas emissions.
4, 143
We identiﬁ  ed eight integrated regional and local urban 
and transport planning and design interventions to inﬂ uence transport mode choices. Land-use, transport, 
and infrastructure interventions and policies interact to create a built form that aﬀ  ects the feasibility and attractiveness of using active travel modes.
144 We have 
argued that travel mode choices aﬀ  ect health through their impact on eight environmental, social and behavioural risk exposures.
Creating cities that produce health and wellbeing 
outcomes needs both regional and local policies that prioritise walking, cycling, and public transport use over private motor vehicle travel. At the local level, good urban design will only be fully eﬀ  ective if supported by well-implemented city-wide and region-wide integrated policies that create accessible employment, education, services, and high-quality public transport.
145
Changing the entrenched patterns of automobile-
centric urban development that are contributing to the NCD pandemic, road traﬃ   c injuries, and other adverse 
health outcomes needs broad social, political, and economic changes as well as multisector involvement. Although integrated land-use and transport planning is vital, land use and transport are typically planned by diﬀ erent agencies and studied by diﬀ  erent disciplines.
146 
These institutional and disciplinary disconnections are at the heart of many of the health risk exposures and outcomes identiﬁ  ed in our model.
 A consortium of 
European countries is already taking steps to address the need for co-ordination across sectors.
146 However, as 
suggested by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
11 leadership from 
transport, planning, and health ministers is urgently needed to facilitate action and overcome barriers.
Academic leadership is also needed. This includes 
interdisciplinary research and expanding interdisciplinary tertiary and workforce development programmes that bring together health and the built environment ﬁ  elds.
147 
However, mobilising and supporting community engagement and action is also critical.
148 Local citizenry 
could inﬂ  uence both political and private sectors by demanding urban planning and design that facilitates walking, cycling, and public transport.
Transport is a determinant of health that contributes to 
the existence, persistence, and (sometimes widening of) health inequities within and between cities.
141 In cities 
around the world, the mobility beneﬁ  ts aﬀ  orded by 
private and public motorised travel are less accessible to the poor and disadvantaged (including elderly, disabled, and young people) who are also more likely to experience the externalised costs of motor vehicle dependency (eg, exposure to noise, pollution, and road trauma).
21,149–151 
Urban and transport planning must therefore prioritise policies, infrastructure, and services that favour the most socioeconomically disadvantaged populations.
There is a need to benchmark and monitor progress on 
the implementation of policies, and to track changes in health impacts. WHO has proposed a set of urban indicators to reduce inequities.
152 We extend this work in 
table 2 in which we set out city planning indicators and outcomes that could be used to compare within and between cities.Series
2920 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016This Series paper has a few limitations. Although the 
evidence presented on how multiple aspects of urban form 
can aﬀ  ect health is relatively consistent, most studies are cross-sectional and done in high-income countries. How ﬁ ndings translate in LMICs is yet to be determined. 
Stronger longitudinal evidence is needed across the board, particularly from natural experiment studies of policy interventions
153–156 that would allow policy impacts to be 
monitored to learn what works in diﬀ  erent contexts, 
particularly in LMICs experiencing rapid changes in patterns of urbanisation.
145 These studies would provide an 
early warning system of any unintended consequences of new policies, enabling them to be modiﬁ  ed to achieve desirable health outcomes. In this paper we sought to raise issues and explore a wide range of pathways requiring further investigation. Although we drew on systematic reviews and meta-analyses where available, we undertook a narrative, rather than a formal systematic review. Finally, many issues were not considered here, but could be investigated in the future. These include the impact of planning decisions on other risk exposures (eg, alcohol consumption and gambling) and gender freedom or safety on public transport.
Legal, administrative, and technical frameworks 
contextualised to local conditions are needed to deliver compact pedestrian-friendly and cycling-friendly cities that reduce private motor vehicle dependency. Although the ﬁ  nal mix of urban and transport planning and design interventions will vary, the overall goal must be to create cities that reduce NCDs, road injuries, and other adverse Indicator
Legislation and policies
Integrated transport and urban 
planningFederal and state transport and urban planning legislation requires integrated transport and urban planning actions to create healthy and sustainable cities and regular review of progress
Air pollution Federal and state air pollution legislation seeks to protect and enhance air quality to promote the health of urban populations
Destination accessibility Federal and state transport and urban planning legislation requires coordinated planning of transport, employment, land use, and infrastructure that ensures 
access by public transport
Distribution of employment Urban planning and design codes that require a balanced ratio of jobs to housing (eg, 0·8–1·2)
Demand management Urban planning, building codes, and local government policies limit car parking; price parking appropriately for contextDesign Urban design codes create pedestrian-friendly and cycling-friendly neighbourhoods, requiring highly connected street networks (eg, ped-sheds
2 ≥0·6 within 
0·8–1·2 km);* pedestrian and cycling infrastructure provision;† public open space; lot layouts that maximise natural surveillance
Density Urban design codes require minimum and maximum context-speciﬁ  c housing densities, including higher density development around activity centres and 
transport hubs
Distance to public transport Urban design codes require frequent service public transport to be within 400–800 m of residential walkable catchmentsDiversity Urban design codes require a diverse mix of housing types
 and local destinations needed for daily living
Desirability Urban design codes incorporate crime prevention through urban design principles, manage traﬃ   c exposure† and establish urban greening provisions
Government transport investmentTransport infrastructure 
investment by modePercentage of total government transport expenditure in a given ﬁ  nancial year spent on pedestrian infrastructure, cycling infrastructure, public transport, and road infrastructure
Urban and transport planning and design interventions
Public transport access Percentage population living within 400–800 m of high-frequency public transportEmployment Percentage of population with employment within ≤30 min of their home by walking, cycling, or public transport
Distribution of employment Jobs to housing ratioTransport infrastructure Ratio of roads (km) to footpaths (km) and designated cycle lanes (km)Density Dwellings or area within 1·2 km of activity centres and public transport hubs, and in urban fringe developments
Distance to transit Percentage of population living within 400 m of a bus stop and 800 m of a rail stop.
Destinations Percentage (urban) land area allocated to destinations required for daily living
Open or green space Percentage (urban) land area allocated to open or green space
Transport outcomesTrip mode share Proportion of total and commuting trips made by walking, cycling, public transport, and private motor vehicle
Risk exposure outcomesRoad trauma Road death and injury rate expressed as the number of cases per 100 000 population; proportion of road injuries and deaths involving pedestrians and cyclists
Respiratory conditions Number of respiratory-related hospital admission cases per 100 000 populationPhysical activity Prevalence of insuﬃ   cient physical activity, expressed as a percentage of adults, adolescents, and children who are physically inactive
Diet Prevalence of adults, adolescents, and children consuming ≥5 servings of fruit and vegetables a day
Obesity Percentage of adult, adolescent, and child population classiﬁ  ed as overweight or obese
*Particularly within walking distance of shops, services, and transport hubs. †Ratio of straight line distance buﬀ  er or street network distance buﬀ  er. Adapted and expanded from WHO.153
Table 2: Indicators that could be used to monitor progress towards the implementation of urban and transport legislation, policies, investment, and outcomes to create cities that 
enhance health and reduce non-communicable diseasesSeries
www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016 2921health risks through promotion of active lifestyles and 
protection of citizens from traﬃ   c, environmental 
pollution, noise, crime, and violence. Achievement of healthier and more compact cities will need well implemented regional and local planning policies that integrate planning for land use, transport, housing, economic, and infrastructure with urban design.
Contributors
BG-C, RR, GT, JFS, and MS conceptualised the paper. BG-C, AV-M, RR, GT, ALD, HB, SF, ML, and NO drafted sections. BGC, AVM and NO responded to critical review. All authors reviewed the literature and critically edited the Series paper.
Declaration of interests
ML reports grants from the Department of Health and Human Services, Victorian Government, Australia. JFS reports grants from Nike, California Endowment, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases; personal fees from Center for Active Design, San Diego State University, San Diego State University Research Foundation, and Santech; non-ﬁ  nancial support from Thai Health Promotion Foundation, International Conference of Behavioral Medicine, Institute of Medicine Dr Mohan’s Diabetes Specialty Centres (Chennai, India), Haifa University (Israel), University of Texas (Austin, TX, USA), Fogarty International Center of National Institutes of Health, American College of Sports Medicine, Universidad Autonoma de Nueva Leon (Monterrey, Mexico), National Council of La Raza Health Summit, Aspen Institute, Urban Land Institute Conference, and Conference of Southwest Funders; and personal fees and non-ﬁ  nancial 
support from Sociedade Brasileira de Atividede Fisica e Saude, International Society of Physical Activity and Health, Oregon Chapter of the American Planning Association, University of Nevada Las Vegas, Harvard School of Public Health, Department of Parks, Recreation, and Tourism Management, North Carolina State University, Arizona State University, School of Nutrition and Health Promotion, Kuwait Institute for Scientiﬁ  c Research, RAND Corporation, National Association of Chronic Disease Directors, University of Washington (Seattle, WA, USA), and TKF Foundation. All other authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
BG-C, MS, and NO are funded by National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC; Australia) Research Fellowships (numbers 1107672, 1043091, and 1003960 respectively). HB and ML are supported by the NHMRC (Australia) Centre for Excellence in Healthy Liveable Communities (number 1061404), The Australian Prevention Partnership Centre (supported by NHMRC, ACT Health, NSW Health, the Australian Preventative Health Agency (ANPHA), the Hospitals Contribution Fund of Australia (HCF), and the HSF Research Foundation), and VicHealth. JFS received support from National Institute of Health grant 111378 and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. 
References
1 Beaglehole R, Bonita R, Horton R, et al. Measuring progress on 
NCDs: one goal and ﬁ  ve targets. Lancet 2012; 380: 1283–85.
2 Das P, Horton R. Rethinking our approach to physical activity. 
Lancet 2012; 380: 189–90.
3 Kleinert S, Horton R. Rethinking and reframing obesity. Lancet 
2015; 385: 2326–28.
4 Watts N, Adger WN, Agnolucci P, et al. Health and climate change: 
policy responses to protect public health. Lancet 2015; 386: 1861–914.
5 UNFPA. State of world population 2010. New York: United Nations 
Population Fund, 2011.
6 Badland H, Whitzman C, Lowe M, et al. Urban liveability: emerging 
lessons from Australia for exploring the potential for indicators to measure the social determinants of health. Soc Sci Med 2014; 111: 64–73.
7 Murray CJL, Vos T, Lozano R, et al. Disability-adjusted life years 
(DALYs) for 291 diseases and injuries in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012; 380: 2197–223.
8 Corburn J. Reconnecting with our roots. American urban planning 
and public health in the twenty-ﬁ  rst century. 
Urban Aﬀ   Rev Thousand Oaks Calif  2007; 42: 688–713.9 Hall P. Cities of tomorrow. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers; 1996.
10 World Health Organization, Commission on the Social 
Determinants of Health. Closing the gap in a generation: Health 
equity through action on the social determinants of health. Final report of the Commission on the social determinants of health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
11 International Transport Forum. Pedestrian safety, urban space and 
health: research report summary document. Paris, France: International Transport Forum, OECD; 2011.
12 United Nations. Sixty seventh session Political Declaration of the 
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases. 2011. http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/66/L.1 (accessed Sept 6, 2015).
13 United Nations. Post-2015 development agenda. Geneva: 
United Nations; 2015.
14 Abu-Lughod JL. Changing Cities: Urban Sociology. New York: 
Harper Collins; 1991.
15 Lay MG. The History of Transport Planning. In: Hensher DA, 
Button KJ, editors. Handbook of Transport Strategy, Policy and Institutions. London: Elsevier, 2005: 157–74.
16 Dimitriou HT, Gakenheimer R. Urban Transport in the Developing 
World, A Handbook of Policy and Practice. London: Edward Elgare Publishing, 2012.
17 Taylor N. Urban Planning Theory since 1945. London: 
SAGE Publications Ltd.; 1998.
18 Stevenson M, Thompson J, de Sá TH, et al. Land use, transport, and 
population health: estimating the health beneﬁ  ts of compact cities. 
Lancet 2016; published online Sept 23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30067-8.
19 Sallis J, Bull F, Burdett R, et al. Using science to guide city planning 
policy and practice to promote health. Lancet 2016; published online Sept 23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30068-X.
20 Ewing R, Cervero R. Travel and the built environment: 
a meta-analysis. J Am Plann Assoc 2010; 76: 265–94.
21 World Health Organization. UN-Habitat. Hidden cities: unmasking 
and overcoming health inequities in urban settings. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2010.
22 Macintyre S, Ellaway A. Neighborhoods and health: an overview. 
In: Kawachi I, Berkman L, editors. Neighbourhoods and health. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2003: p. 20-42.
23 Diez Roux AV, Mair C. Neighborhoods and health. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
2010; 1186: 125–45.
24 Turrell G, Kavanagh A, Draper G, Subramanian SV. Do places 
aﬀ  ect the probability of death in A ustralia? A multilevel study of
 
area-level disadvantage, individual-level socioeconomic position and all-cause mortality, 1998-2000. J Epidemiol Community Health  
2007; 61: 13–19.
25 Mohan D. Road safety in less-motorized environments: future 
concerns. Int J Epidemiol 2002; 31: 527–32.
26 Peden M, Scurﬁ  eld R, Sleet D, et al, World report on road traﬃ   c 
injury prevention. Geneva: World Health Organization and World Bank, 2004.
27 Burch C, Cook L, Dischinger P. A comparison of KABCO and AIS 
injury severity metrics using CODES linked data. Traﬃ   c Inj Prev  
2014; 15: 627–30.
28 World Health Organization. Health statistics and information 
systems. Estimates for 2000–2012. 2015. http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/estimates/en/index2.html (accessed May 17, 2016).
29 Bhalla K, Shotten M, Cohen A, et al. Transport for health: the global 
burden of disease from motorized road transport. Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2014.
30 Mathers CD, Fat DM, Inoue M, Rao C, Lopez AD. Counting the 
dead and what they died from: an assessment of the global status of cause of death data. Bull World Health Organ 2005; 83: 171–77 .
31 Yeo J, Park S, Jang K. Eﬀ  ects of urban sprawl and vehicle miles 
traveled on traﬃ   c fatalities. Traﬃ  c Inj Prev  2015; 16: 397–403.
32 Malekafzali S. Healthy, equitable transportation policy: 
recommendations and research. Oakland, CA: Prevention Institute, 2009.
33 Bhalla K, Ezzati M, Mahal A, Salomon J, Reich M. A risk-based 
method for modeling traﬃ   c fatalities. Risk Anal 2007; 27: 125–36.
34 World Health Organization. Global status report on road safety. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2013.Series
2922 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 201635 Fuller D, Morency P. A population approach to transportation 
planning: reducing exposure to motor-vehicles. 
J Environ Public Health 2013; 2013: 916460.
36 International Traﬃ   c Safety Data and Analysis Group. Road safety 
annual report 2014: summary. Paris, France: International Transport Forum, OECD, 2014.
37 Campbell B, Zegeer C, Huang H, Cynecki M. A review of 
pedestrian safety research in the United States and abroad. Washington, DC: Federal Highway Administration, 2004.
38 US Department of Transportation. Traﬃ   c safety facts 2012 data: 
pedestrians. 2014. http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/Pubs/811888.pdf (accessed May 21, 2015).
39 Giles-Corti B, Kelty SF, Zubrick SR, Villanueva KP. Encouraging 
walking for transport and physical activity in children and adolescents: how important is the built environment? Sports Med 2009; 39: 995–1009.
40 Shaw B, Watson B, Frauendienst B, Redecker A, Jones T, Hillman M. 
Children’s independent mobility: a comparative study in England and Germany (1971-2010). London: Policy Studies Institute, 2013.
41 Fyhri A, Hjorthol R, Mackett RL, Fotel TN, Kytta M. Children’s active 
travel and independent mobility in four countries: development, social contributing trends and measures. Transp Policy 2011; 18: 703–10.
42 Buehler R, Pucher J. Walking and cycling in Western Europe and 
the United States: trends, policies, and lessons. TR News 2012; 5: 34–42.
43 Pucher J, Dijkstra L. Promoting safe walking and cycling to improve 
public health: lessons from The Netherlands and Germany. Am J Public Health 2003; 93: 1509–16.
44 Pucher J, Dill J, Handy S. Infrastructure, programs, and policies to 
increase bicycling: an international review. Prev Med 2010; 50 (suppl 1): S106–25.
45 World Health Organization. More than 270 000 pedestrians killed 
on roads each year. 2013. http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/notes/2013/make_walking_safe_20130502/en/ (accessed June 12, 2015).
46 Gasana J, Dillikar D, Mendy A, Forno E, Ramos Vieira E. 
Motor vehicle air pollution and asthma in children: a meta-analysis. Environ Res 2012; 117: 36–45.
47 Yang W, Omaye ST. Air pollutants, oxidative stress and human 
health. Mutat Res 2009; 674: 45–54.
48 Samet J, Krewski D. Health eﬀ  ects associated with exposure to 
ambient air pollution. J Toxicol Environ Health A 2007; 70: 227–42.
49 Shah ASV, Langrish JP, Nair H, et al. Global association of air 
pollution and heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2013; 382: 1039–48.
50 Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, et al. A comparative risk assessment 
of burden of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 2012; 380: 2224–60.
51 Samet J. Community design and air quality. In: Dannenberg A, 
Frumkin H, Jackson R, editors. Making healthy places: Designing and building for health, wellbeing, and sustainability. Washington, DC: Island Press, 2011.
52 Cervero R. Linking urban transport and land use in developing 
countries. J Transport Land Use 2013; 6: 7–24.
53 Zhu Y , Hinds WC, Kim S, Sioutas C. Concentration and size 
distribution of ultraﬁ  ne particles near a major highway. J Air Waste Manag Assoc 2002; 52: 1032–42.
54 Gwilliam K. Urban transport in developing countries. Transp Rev 
2003; 23: 197–216.
55 Woodcock J, Edwards P, Tonne C, et al. Public health beneﬁ  ts of 
strategies to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: urban land transport. Lancet 2009; 374: 1930–43.
56 Giles L
V, Koehle MS. The health eﬀ  ects of exercising in air 
pollution. Sports Med 2014; 44: 223–49.
57 Rank J, Folke J, Jespersen PH. Diﬀ  erences in cyclists and car 
drivers exposure to air pollution from traﬃ   c in the city of Copenhagen. Sci Total Environ 2001; 279: 131–36.
58 Kent J, Thompson S. Connecting and strengthening communities 
in places for health and well-being. Australian Planner 2014; 51: 260–71.59 Rojas-Rueda D, de Nazelle A, Tainio M, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ. 
The health risks and beneﬁ  ts of cycling in urban environments compared with car use: health impact assessment study. BMJ 2011; 343: d4521.
60 Johan de Hartog J, Boogaard H, Nijland H, Hoek G. Do the health 
beneﬁ  ts of cycling outweigh the risks? Environ Health Perspect 2010; 118: 1109–16.
61 Giles-Corti B, Ryan K, Foster S. Increasing density in Australia: 
Maximising the health beneﬁ  ts and minimising harm. Melbourne: National Heart Foundation of Australia, 2012.
62 Ising H, Kruppa B. Health eﬀ  ects caused by noise: evidence in the 
literature from the past 25 years. Noise Health 2004; 6: 5–13.
63 Tobías A, Recio A, Díaz J, Linares C. Health impact assessment of 
traﬃ   c noise in Madrid (Spain). Environ Res 2015; 137: 136–40.
64 Moudon AV. Real noise from the urban environment: how ambient 
community noise aﬀ  ects health and what can be done about it. Am J Prev Med 2009; 37: 167–71.
65 Hänninen O, Knol AB, Jantunen M, et al, and the EBoDE Working 
Group. Environmental burden of disease in Europe: assessing nine risk factors in six countries. Environ Health Perspect 2014; 122: 439–46.
66 Clark C, Stansfeld SA. The eﬀ  ect of transportation noise on health 
and cognitive development: a review of recent evidence. Int J Comp Psychol 2007; 20: 145–58.
67 van Kempen EEMM, Kruize H, Boshuizen HC, Ameling CB, 
Staatsen BAM, de Hollander AEM. The association between noise exposure and blood pressure and ischemic heart disease: a meta-analysis. Environ Health Perspect 2002; 110: 307–17 .
68 Babisch W. Road traﬃ   c noise and cardiovascular risk. Noise Health 
2008; 10: 27–33.
69 Evans GW. The built environment and mental health. 
J Urban Health 2003; 80: 536–55.
70 Halpern D. Mental health and the build environment: more than 
bricks and mortar? Bristol: Taylor and Francis, 1995.
71 Holt-Lunstad J, Smith TB, Baker M, Harris T, Stephenson D. 
Loneliness and social isolation as risk factors for mortality: a meta-analytic review . P
erspect Psychol Sci 2015; 10: 227–37 .
72 Hale C. Fear of crime: a review of the literature. Int Rev Victimology 
1996; 4: 79–150.
73 Foster S, Giles-Corti B. The built environment, neighborhood crime 
and constrained physical activity: an exploration of inconsistent ﬁ ndings. Prev Med 2008; 47: 241–51.
74 Carver A, Timperio A, Crawford D. Playing it safe: the inﬂ  uence of 
neighbourhood safety on children’s physical activity. A review. Health Place 2008; 14: 217–27 .
75 Lovasi GS, Hutson MA, Guerra M, Neckerman KM. 
Built environments and obesity in disadvantaged populations. Epidemiol Rev 2009; 31: 7–20.
76 Lorenc T, Clayton S, Neary D, et al. Crime, fear of crime, 
environment, and mental health and wellbeing: mapping review of theories and causal pathways. Health Place 2012; 18: 757–65.
77 Cozens P. New urbanism, crime and the suburbs: a review of the 
evidence. Urban Policy Res 2008; 26: 429–44.
78 Day K. Strangers in the night: women’s fear of sexual assault on 
urban college campuses. J Archit Plann Res 1999; 16: 289–312.
79 World Health Organization. Global status report on non-
communicable diseases 2014. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2015.
80 Lee IM, Shiroma EJ, Lobelo F, Puska P, Blair SN, Katzmarzyk PT, 
and the Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group. Eﬀ  ect of 
physical inactivity on major non-communicable diseases worldwide: an analysis of burden of disease and life expectancy. Lancet 2012; 380: 219–29.
81 Van Holle V, Deforche B, Van Cauwenberg J, et al. Relationship 
between the physical environment and diﬀ  erent domains of physical activity in European adults: a systematic review. BMC Public Health 2012; 12: 807 .
82 Hajna S, Ross NA, Brazeau AS, Bélisle P, Joseph L, Dasgupta K. 
Associations between neighbourhood walkability and daily steps in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health 2015; 15: 768.
83 McCormack GR, Shiell A. In search of causality: a systematic review 
of the relationship between the built environment and physical activity among adults. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2011; 8: 125.Series
www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016 292384 Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Frank LD, et al. Neighborhood environment 
and psychosocial correlates of adults’ physical activity. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012; 44: 637–46.
85 Sugiyama T, Neuhaus M, Cole R, Giles-Corti B, Owen N. 
Destination and route attributes associated with adults’ walking: a review. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012; 44: 1275–86.
86 Sugiyama T, Leslie E, Giles-Corti B, Owen N. Associations of 
neighbourhood greenness with physical and mental health: do walking, social coherence and local social interaction explain the relationships? J Epidemiol Community Health 2008; 62: e9.
87 Francis J, Wood LJ, Knuiman M, Giles-Corti B. Quality or quantity? 
Exploring the relationship between Public Open Space attributes and mental health in Perth, Western Australia. Soc Sci Med 2012; 74: 1570–77 .
88 Maller C, Townsend M, Brown P, St Leger L. Healthy parks healthy 
people. The health beneﬁ  ts of contact with nature in a park context. Melbourne: Deakin University, 2002.
89 Roe JJ, Thompson CW, Aspinall PA, et al. Green space and stress: 
evidence from cortisol measures in deprived urban communities. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2013; 10: 4086–103.
90 Takano T, Nakamura K, Watanabe M. Urban residential 
environments and senior citizens’ longevity in megacity areas: the importance of walkable green spaces. J Epidemiol Community Health 2002; 56: 913–18.
91 Owen N. Sedentary behavior: understanding and inﬂ  uencing adults’ 
prolonged sitting time. Prev Med 2012; 55: 535–39.
92 Owen N, Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW. Too much sitting: 
the population health science of sedentary behavior. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2010; 38: 105–13.
93 Dunstan DW, Barr EL, Healy GN, et al. Television viewing time and 
mortality: the Australian Diabetes, Obesity and Lifestyle study (AusDiab). Circulation 2010; 121: 384–91.
94 Thorp AA, Owen N, Neuhaus M, Dunstan DW. Sedentary behaviors 
and subsequent health outcomes in adults a systematic review of longitudinal studies, 1996-2011. Am J Prev Med 2011; 41: 207–15.
95 Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, Owen N. 
Television time and continuous metabolic risk in physically active adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2008; 40: 639–45.
96 Owen N, Sparling PB, Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Matthews CE. 
Sedentary behavior: emerging evidence for a new health risk. Mayo Clin Proc 2010; 85: 1138–41.
97 Sugiyama T, Ding D, Owen N. Commuting by car: weight gain 
among physically active adults. Am J Prev Med 2013; 44: 169–73.
98 Sugiyama T, Neuhaus M, Owen N. Active transport, the built 
environment and human health. In: Rassia S, Pardalos P, editors. Sustainable environmental design in architecture: impacts on health. London: Springer, 2011: 43–67 .
99 Vallance JK, Winkler EA, Gardiner PA, Healy GN, Lynch BM, Owen N. 
Associations of objectively-assessed physical activity and sedentary time with depression: NHANES (2005-2006). Prev Med 2011; 53: 284–88.
100 Kazi A, Duncan M, Clemes S, Haslam C. A survey of sitting time 
among UK employees. Occup Med (Lond) 2014; 64: 497–502.
101 Ng SW, Popkin BM. Time use and physical activity: a shift away 
from movement across the globe. Obes Rev 2012; 13: 659–80.
102 Owen N, Salmon J, Koohsari MJ, Turrell G, Giles-Corti B. Sedentary 
behaviour and health: mapping environmental and social contexts to  
underpin chronic disease prevention. Br J Sports M
ed 2014; 48: 174–77 .
103 Owen N, Sugiyama T, Eakin EE, Gardiner PA, Tremblay MS, 
Sallis JF. Adults’ sedentary behavior determinants and interventions. Am J Prev Med 2011; 41: 189–96.
104 Koohsari MJ, Sugiyama T, Sahlqvist S, Mavoa S, Hadgraft N, Owen N. 
Neighborhood environmental attributes and adults’ sedentary behaviors: Review and research agenda. Prev Med 2015; 77: 141–49.
105 Lock K, Pomerleau J, Causer L, Altmann DR, McKee M. The global 
burden of disease attributable to low consumption of fruit and vegetables: implications for the global strategy on diet. Bull World Health Organ 2005; 83: 100–08.
106 Ng M, Fleming T, Robinson M, et al. Global, regional, and national 
prevalence of overweight and obesity in children and adults during 1980-2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. Lancet 2014; 384: 766–81.
107 Caspi CE, Sorensen G, Subramanian SV, Kawachi I. The local food 
environment and diet: a systematic review. Health Place 2012; 18: 1172–87 .108 Thornton LE, Pearce JR, Macdonald L, Lamb KE, Ellaway A. Does the 
choice of neighbourhood supermarket access measure inﬂ  uence 
associations with individual-level fruit and vegetable consumption? A case study from Glasgow. Int J Health Geogr 2012; 11: 29.
109 Thornton LE, Pearce JR, Kavanagh AM. Using Geographic 
Information Systems (GIS) to assess the role of the built environment in inﬂ  uencing obesity: a glossary. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2011; 8: 71.
110 Boone-Heinonen J, Gordon-Larsen P, Kiefe CI, Shikany JM, 
Lewis CE, Popkin BM. Fast food restaurants and food stores: longitudinal associations with diet in young to middle-aged adults: the CARDIA study. Arch Intern Med 2011; 171: 1162–70.
111 Fan J, Hanson H, Zick C, Brown B, Kowaleski-Jones L, Smith K. 
Geographic scale matters in detecting the relationship between neighborhood food environments and obesity risk: an analysis of driver license records. BMJ Open 2014; 4: e005458.
112 Miura K, Turrell G. Contribution of psychosocial factors to the 
association between socioeconomic position and takeaway food consumption. PLoS ONE 2014; 9: e108799.
113 Michimi A, Wimberly MC. Associations of supermarket 
accessibility with obesity and fruit and vegetable consumption in the conterminous United States. Int J Health Geogr 2010; 9: 49.
114 Coveney J, O’Dwyer LA. Eﬀ  ects of mobility and location on food 
access. Health Place 2009; 15: 45–55.
115 Winkler E, Turrell G, Patterson C. Does living in a disadvantaged 
area mean fewer opportunities to purchase fresh fruit and vegetables in the area? Findings from the Brisbane food study. Health Place 2006; 12: 306–19.
116 Popkin BM, Adair LS, Ng SW. Global nutrition transition and the 
pandemic of obesity in developing countries. Nutr Rev 2012; 70: 3–21.
117 Godfray HC, Beddington JR, Crute IR, et al. Food security: 
the challenge of feeding 9 billion people. Science 2010; 327: 812–18.
118 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Aﬀ  airs 
Population Division. World urbanization prospects: the 2011 
revision. Data tables and highlights. New York, NY , USA: United N ations; 2012.
119 Knox P, McC
arthy L. Urbanization: an introduction to urban 
geography. 3rd ed. Boston, MA, USA: Pearson; 2012.
120 Gomez LF, Sarmiento R, Ordoñez MF, et al. Urban environment 
interventions linked to the promotion of physical activity: a mixed methods study applied to the urban context of Latin America. Soc Sci Med 2015; 131: 18–30.
121 Cervero R, Golub A. Informal transport: a global perspective. 
Transp Policy 2007; 14: 445–57 .
122 United Nations Human Settlements Programme. Planning and 
design for sustainable urban mobility: policy directions: global report on human settlements 2013. Abridged edition. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, 2013.
123 Vlahov D. Urban health: global perspectives. 1st ed. San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass, 2010.
124 World Bank. World development indicators 2011 on CD-ROM. 
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2011.
125 World Health Organization. Healthy urban planning: Report of a 
consultation meeting. Kobe, Japan: Centre for Health Development, World Health Organization, 2011.
126 Hallal PC, Andersen LB, Bull FC, Guthold R, Haskell W, 
Ekelund U, and the Lancet Physical Activity Series Working Group. Global physical activity levels: surveillance progress, pitfalls, and prospects. Lancet 2012; 380: 247–57 .
127 Satterthwaite D. The links between poverty and the environment in 
urban areas of Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Ann Am Acad Pol Soc Sci 2003; 590: 73–92.
128 Ji S, Cherry CR, J Bechle M, Wu Y , Marshall JD. Electric vehicles in 
China: emissions and health impacts. Environ Sci Technol 2012; 46: 2018–24.
129 Bell AC, Ge K, Popkin BM. The road to obesity or the path to 
prevention: motorized transportation and obesity in China. Obes Res 2002; 10: 277–83.
130 Harpham T, Tanner M. Urban health in developing countries: 
progress and prospects. Oxon: Earthscan, 2013.
131 Díaz Del Castillo A, Sarmiento OL, Reis RS, Brownson RC. 
Translating evidence to policy: urban interventions and physical activity promotion in Bogotá, Colombia and Curitiba, Brazil. Transl Behav Med 2011; 1: 350–60.Series
2924 www.thelancet.com   Vol 388   December 10, 2016132 Hidalgo DGL. BRT and BHLS around the world: explosive growth, 
large positive impacts and many issues outstanding. 
Res Transp Econ 2013; 39: 8–13.
133 Hino AA, Reis RS, Sarmiento OL, Parra DC, Brownson RC. 
Built environment and physical activity for transportation in adults from Curitiba, Brazil. J Urban Health 2014; 91: 446–62.
134 Sarmiento OL, Schmid TL, Parra DC, et al. Quality of life, physical 
activity, and built environment characteristics among colombian adults. J Phys Act Health 2010; 7 (suppl 2): S181–95.
135 United Nations Human Settlements Programme. State of Latin 
American and Caribbean cities 2012. Towards a new urban transition. Kenya: UN-Habitat, 2012.
136 Shaheen S, Zhang H, Martin E, Guzman S. China’s Hangzhou 
public bicycle: understanding early adoption and behavioral response to bikesharing. Transp Res Rec 2011; 2247: 33–41.
137 Tang Y , Pan H, Shen Q. Bike-renting systems in Beijing, Shanghai 
and Hangzhou and their impact on travel behavior. Paper 11-3862. Transportation Research Board 90th Annual Meeting; 2011; Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board, 2011.
138 Dobbs R, Pohl H, Lin D-Y , et al. Infrastructure productivity: how to 
save $1 trillion a year. London: McKinsey Global Institute, 2013.
139 Haines A, McMichael AJ, Smith KR, et al. Public health beneﬁ  ts of 
strategies to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: overview and implications for policy makers. Lancet 2009; 374: 2104–14.
140 Giles-Corti B, Foster S, Shilton T, Falconer R. The co-beneﬁ  ts for 
health of investing in active transportation. N S W Public Health Bull 2010; 21: 122–27 .
141 Marmot M, Allen J, Goldblatt P, et al. Fair society, healthy lives: the 
Marmot Review. Strategic review of health inequalities in England post-2010. London: UCL Institute for Health Equity, 2010.
142 Putnam R. Bowling alone: the collapse and revival of American 
community. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 2000.
143 Lowe M. Obesity and climate change mitigation in Australia: 
overview and analysis of policies with co-beneﬁ  ts. 
Aust N Z J Public Health 2014; 38: 19–24.
144 World Health Organization. Can urban development, housing and 
transport policy act as health policy? Economics of social determinants of health and health inequalities: a resource book: World Health Organization, 2013: 93–114.
145 Hooper P, Giles-Corti B, Knuiman M. Evaluating the 
implementation and active living impacts of a state government planning policy designed to create walkable neighborhoods in Perth, Western Australia. Am J Health Promot 2014; 28 (suppl): S5–18.146 Schweizer C, Racioppi F, Nemer L. Developing national action 
plans on transport, health and environment: A step-by-step manual for policy-makers and planners. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Oﬃ   ce for Europe, 2014.
147 Giles-Corti B, Sallis JF, Sugiyama T, Frank LD, Lowe M, Owen N. 
Translating active living research into policy and practice: one important pathway to chronic disease prevention. J Public Health Policy 2015; 36: 231–43.
148 World Health Organization. The Ottawa Charter for health 
promotion. Health Promot Int 1986; 1: 3–5.
149 Turrell G, Haynes M, Wilson LA, Giles-Corti B. Can the built 
environment reduce health inequalities? A study of neighbourhood socioeconomic disadvantage and walking for transport. Health Place 2013; 19: 89–98.
150 Sustainable Development Commission. Fairness in a car-dependent 
society. London, UK: Sustainable Development Commission; 2011.
151 Lipfert FW. Air pollution and poverty: does the sword cut both 
ways? J Epidemiol Community Health 2004; 58: 2–3.
152 World Health Organization. Urban HEART: Urban Health Equity 
Assessment and Response Tool: user manual. Kobe, Japan: WHO Centre for Health Development, 2010.
153 Craig P, Cooper C, Gunnell D, et al. Using natural experiments to 
evaluate population health interventions: new Medical Research Council guidance. J Epidemiol Community Health  2012; 66: 1182–86.
154 Bates CJ, Hamer M, M
ishra GD. A study of relationships between 
bone-related vitamins and minerals, related risk markers, and subsequent mortality in older British people: the National Diet and Nutrition Survey of People Aged 65 Years and Over. Osteoporos Int 2012; 23: 457–66.
155 Goodman A, Sahlqvist S, Ogilvie D, and the iConnect Consortium. 
New walking and cycling routes and increased physical activity: one- and 2-year ﬁ  ndings from the UK iConnect Study. Am J Public Health 2014; 104: e38–46.
156 Giles-Corti B, Knuiman M, Timperio A, et al. Evaluation of the 
implementation of a state government community design policy aimed at increasing local walking: design issues and baseline results from RESIDE, Perth Western Australia. Prev Med 2008; 46: 46–54. 